YouTube subscribers, they're about as
loyal as a New Year's resolution. It
just so happens that my New Year's
resolution in 2026 [music]
was to be kind to subscribers.
As you can see, that's not going very
well. But, I do have some good news.
This subscriber game is pretty much dead
these days. Today, YouTube is a
recommendation engine, [music] and your
tiny channel is just one upload away
from exploding, no matter how many
subscribers you have or you don't have.
You're not convinced, are you? I can
tell. All right, let me ask you this. Go
to the analytics section of the YouTube
studio, then find the audience tab, and
scroll down to this panel, and tell me
in the comments below how much watch
time you actually get from your
subscribers.
It's not as many as what you thought, is
it? Put simply, small channels are
having big moments on YouTube every
single day. Let me give you an example.
This channel, The Spencer Howard Show,
went from just 66 subscribers to over
2,000 subscribers with a single video
that raked in over 100,000 views when
everything else before it didn't really
do anything. And that is all of the
proof you need to know that you can do
this as well. If you do, stick around to
the end of this video. I'm going to show
you the three things that decide whether
or not a video flies or it flops.
Especially the last one, you want to pay
attention to that. So, here is what's
happening across the creative landscape
right now. YouTube is big, bigger than
it's ever been before. Attention has
been fragmented across the entire
platform. And because of that, your
views no longer really come from your
subscriber base. They're more likely to
come from browse and suggested, one
video matching with one particular
viewer. And this is the most
intoxicating part of it all. Even if you
have done nothing right for years, the
wrong niche, terrible thumbnails,
inconsistency, we are now in a YouTube
world where you can close the gap
fast. And I can tell you that from a lot
of experience, and to be quite frank, a
lot of failure. The VidIQ channel, as
time of recording, is close to hitting
two and a half of these and yet we still
make videos that underperform. And at
the same time, a channel with let's say
less than 200 subscribers could upload
their fourth video and hit half a
million views. The reason for this is
because YouTube isn't there to reward me
for my past successes and back catalog
of videos. It simply rewards the videos
that matter today for the viewers who
are watching now. So, let us for a
moment talk about your YouTube history.
You probably posted something like 20
videos and you thought that was enough
for your channel to take off. But, it
didn't and you decided that YouTube
hates small channels and the algorithm
is rigged against you. Well, again, I've
got some good news. Yeah, this video is
all about good news. The YouTube
algorithm is not rigged against you or
anyone else. Put very, very simply, the
audience, not the algorithm, didn't
think your videos were good enough yet.
And that is the best possible news
because having an attitude of the
YouTube platform is against me is
unfixable. It's the end game. Nobody can
do anything about that. But, if you come
to the YouTube table with an attitude of
okay, my videos aren't good enough yet,
that is something you can start to fix
with your very next upload. Failure on
YouTube is usually down to one of three
things. The most common one by far is
that you gave up too early. You simply
didn't have the patience for how many
reps it takes to break through on
YouTube. Yes, I know for a rare,
talented few, they will break out in the
first few videos that they make. But,
spoiler alert, for most, it takes a lot
of reps, typically hundreds of efforts.
For me, I think it took over 300 videos
and maybe 5 years before I felt I was
just starting to figure out YouTube a
little bit. And that was 10 years ago.
A lot has changed since then. The second
reason for failure is a brutal truth,
but it's likely that your content is
just far too selfish and self-indulgent.
Every video feels utterly exhausting for
the viewer. Here is my journey.
Subscribe to my channel. Give me your
time. Let's be clear about this. While
YouTube is a distribution platform, you
are not entitled to attention just
because you post videos. The viewers at
this point don't owe you anything. And
that leads us into the third reason why
creators fail. It's a big one. Think of
it a bit like boxing. If every single
video is like a big right hand hook, a
hard ask, a do something for me beg, the
audience will see that and duck out of
the way. First, you have to throw the
quick jab. On YouTube, the jab is value
and entertainment.
You can tell I'm not really a boxer.
With these little jabs, there is no ask,
there is no strings attached, but what
it sets you up for is the big right hook
later. Although, I do realize that this
metaphor basically amounts to beating up
your viewers. Yeah, don't do that. As
for subscribers,
yeah, batter them as much as you want.
Just not your viewers.
Here is something that I really need you
to hear. It's okay to make mistakes.
It's okay to post trash.
It is okay to fail in public, [music]
especially on YouTube. Don't get
paralyzed by the creative process. Post
the video. Trust me, nothing beats
experience. And then watch the
performance of the video in the first 24
to 48 hours. If the click-through rate
and the average view duration is higher
than your average on your channel,
[music] then well done. It's a good
video. And at this point, YouTube can
actually get quite easy because all you
need to do is repeat the steps. Do more
of the same, a sequel, double down,
build a playlist, promote that type of
content. A lot of creators simply burn
themselves out by producing [music] in
the dark without ever getting to see any
of the results. Creators will often put
their own perfection above the needs of
the audience's desire to just watch one
of your videos. And once you do unleash
that video into the YouTube world,
you'll get the feedback you need pretty
quickly. Now, some of you are right to
ask creators like us here at VidIQ how
often we publish on the platform. And
here's the honest answer, between long
form, shorts, live streams, we are
posting a lot more than the creator who
is only uploading to YouTube once a
week. And that was true even when I was
running this VidIQ channel all by
myself. Now, let me stress, this isn't
because the algorithm rewards volume. We
do this because every upload is an
opportunity, and YouTube doesn't cap
your effort at one video a week. And you
don't need a bigger subscriber base to
get more views. What you do need is more
experience, more data, and perhaps most
important of all, more audience
feedback. And it could be the 10th, it
could be the 50th, it could be the 100th
video you upload to your channel that
changes the entire trajectory of it.
This is all really about adaptability.
The algorithm has changed yet again.
There are big channels everywhere, and
every niche has some form of
competition. And if you think about
those things too much, you can sit there
and cry that everything's got harder. Or
you can do what YouTube is begging you
to do right now, and go on offense.
Remember that channel I mentioned at the
top of this video, zero momentum, almost
no subscribers, and yet a single video
changed everything. That is not luck. It
is someone who is not stuck mourning the
old YouTube game that is long gone. It
is someone getting stuck in to the new
way this works, playing the game, and
having a hell of a time doing it. And
here is why this matters more as every
single day passes. We now live in an AI
world, and it's not going anywhere. Our
feeds are being flooded by infinite
cheap generated content. And when that
happens, the key defensible thing you
have is yourself, a brand, a
recognizable identity. It is a
recognizable face, a format people can
trust, a reason a viewer picks you over
the thousands of other identical
thumbnails. Build your channel identity
now because it is one of the things AI
can't really commoditize. And at this
point, the whole YouTube game becomes
somewhat of a barbell. On the one end,
you have bleeding-edge technology, AI
tools, faster production, data,
automation. Learn it, use it, see what
works And the counterweight to all of
this is to be radically, authentically
human, quirky, flawed, but
unapologetically you. And then, in the
middle of all of this, we're going to
have a big dollop of lazy, say-nothing,
faceless channels. And those are the
ones that are going to get squeezed into
oblivion because they don't offer
anything to anybody. But if you create
on both ends of this barbell, you become
untouchable. Now then, knowing all of
this is great, right? But, you can have
the perfect plan to run a marathon and
still collapse on mile two if you've
never actually trained for it. So, I
want you to take these next 12 months
and turn them into your upload year on
YouTube, not your thinking and planning
year on YouTube. You see, the YouTube
algorithm is a bit like an axe because
that's the only appropriate prop I've
got for this metaphor. Now, you can pick
it up, you can tame it, you can
weaponize it for your YouTube channel,
or you can place it somewhere quite
precarious and let it take your
channel's head off. I know which option
I'm choosing. What about you? And now
that it's taken you a single second to
make the right choice, let's continue
with your YouTube education with smart
ways to grow your channel without making
a single video. Yeah, I thought that'd
catch your interest. We've made a video
all about it right over here. I'll see
you in there right now.